[Music]
hey Brett how you doing Joe I'm doing
really well I that that thing we did
yesterday was so fulfilling it was so uh
heart opening and
wonderful and uh yeah I'm still just
basking in the glow of that yeah it was
beautiful for for some context we we had
a grief ceremony yesterday for for
somebody in in our community who
recently lost a child and uh
it was just really really tender really
moving
and there were in the final sharing
circle around it it was just amazing to
see how much kind of unexpected value
people got from it that was Far Beyond
just the expectation of like we're
grieving this loss
and and I
think part of what was part of what was
behind that is just that there were so
many different different experiences
happening in the same
place yeah and and there was a sharing
of it and a support that uh yeah that's
just something I really want to have in
my
life yeah it was an amazing it was an
amazing situation because you know so
for a little context here a person who
had been in one of my courses that you
were in like five years ago or something
I hadn't heard from Forever called up
and talked to me about the death of um
his child and I immediately was like we
need to mourn together as a community
and in my head immediately I was like
this is something that's important for
the community and it's important for
them um I think in their mind it was
something like we were doing for them
and there was like notable hesitation
and and when speaking his wife didn't
really know the community and so she was
kind of coming in blind and I called
beforehand and
what was really clear was that like so
many people who have had a loss like the
funeral and that whole experience just
kind of
sucks um you know people
are you know trying to make them feel
better which is not helpful and or
wanting them wanting to experience their
pain as a way to or their sadness as a
way to like be able to purge their own
sadness and there's this feeling of
obligation of the person who is Mourning
and and like they're supposed to take
care of people emotionally at least and
there's just all this stuff that happens
and
so I I was very clear with her like this
like no [__] all that there's no
obligation here and I'm going to be
really clear upfront and our community
generally knows this anyways that it's
like not about trying to make you feel
better and it's not about having you
feel the emotions for them that it's
about everybody feeling their own
grief and it was amazing how at the end
of the ceremony it really wasn't about
them it was about them primarily but it
was also about everybody else's healing
that they got to go through and how
their story and what they went through
healed the whole community and and I
remember just seeing this moment
of you know she came into this thing
blond not knowing people and then then
when she saw other people grieving and
feeling the pain it immediately let her
know she was in the safe place instead
of like oh are you okay it was like I
feel you I am with you and you could
just see that like oh okay she saw that
this was a safe place and it was amazing
and it just made me really proud of the
community
um that that has that that I get to be a
part of that some to some degree
surrounds this work but not only that
and yeah I was just I was really stok by
and I was really I was really excited to
be able to talk about it today since it
was so fresh on my
mind yeah yeah one one thing that that
struck me was just the the difference in
the feeling from like many funerals that
I've been to and this particular this
particular moment and there's a way that
we could go into a grief ceremony and
what made it different but also there's
just the overall like the community
component here that I want to stick with
so I want I want to talk about what do
we mean by
by Community here because there's
there's a lot of people out there with a
group of friends and right a lot of
those friends may also be feeling a deep
loneliness and not feeling a sense of
community and there's a lot of talk
about community in in my circles lately
and yeah also a lot of confusion about
what exactly it
is in the most functional sense of the
word the community is where everybody
understands that they he health is tied
to the health of the community that
their job is to um help the community be
healthy because it is a reflection of
and an influence on their health
meaning um
if there's a marriage in trouble inside
of the community that the community
supports that
marriage um because if the if a marriage
is having trouble inside of a community
it it is a reflection of something else
happening inside of the community and to
help make that marriage functional or to
heal that marriage or to heal whatever
is there maybe it stays or doesn't stay
as a marriage but to help heal that
process also heals the community it
heals everybody inside of the community
and so for that for that kind of a
community to exist there has to be a
tremendous amount of transparency a
tremendous amount of
vulnerability um a a good deal of
impartiality so it's not what we have in
our society often is like
somebody judging you know like I have my
community and they're telling me how to
[__] be happy or they're telling me
how to save my marriage but they're not
being with me in it they're not they're
not actually like witnessing and
experiencing my marriage with me in a
non-judgmental open loving way and
there's safety and so in a community
it's about having that full
vulnerability but not getting it faced
with judgment or advice it's it's being
with you and and and somebody seeing
that it's not not your issue because
your marriage is bad it's the
community's issue and so they're
listening to it like without that
judgment I think that's what really
great Community looks like yeah yeah and
also the layer of what they make it mean
because if there's a if there's a
problem if there's a if there's
challenges in a in a relationship within
a community does the community make that
mean that something's wrong and it needs
to be fixed such that they the conflict
stops and then it becomes an oppressive
Community or right right yeah not that
or is it a bunch of avoidant people
being like yep there's whatever not my
monkeys that's been my role
traditionally when there's been some
kind of stuff like that in a community
I'm just like okay you handle
that right not my pig not my farm yeah
yeah yeah yeah yeah so the the not a
sense of obligation but also a
commitment to the health of the people
in the community with and this I feel
really is really important with impart
it and I guess we could say view in
general
yeah yeah and and it's and it's I think
the the Nuance which I said there is
like it's not it's not other meaning
it's not like I am I'm I am they are
committed to their health it is that is
a reflection of this community's
health meaning like oh if that marriage
isn't doing well healing that marriage
doesn't just heal the marriage it heals
the community because it's it's a
reflection of something happening inside
of the community as well so it's it's
seeing all the issues in the community
as our issues as my issue instead of
as like their issue and I think that's
and when you feel when you get that
sense like at the ceremony yesterday you
got that sense of everybody was healed
by this community was Stronger by going
in into this morning together and
sharing these stories
together they they were happier they
were healthier but everybody was and the
whole Community was strengthened by it
and there's a bond in that Community
because of it yeah one one thing that I
think is key here is that that yes
anything that's going on in the
community is a reflection of the
community but not in a way that like oh
you're reflecting poorly on the
community but or in a way that I am
responsible for fixing this thing with
you because I am the community but
rather it's that oh there's something
going on in the community how can I work
on the the reflection of that in
myself yeah such that I can show up to
it
fully and how do how do I you know like
in my case it was hey let's do a morning
ceremony and like how like H how hey can
the community come together and support
you and your wife how do we do that and
these are tools that I don't think most
people have or most communities have how
do we come together as Community to
support somebody in a way that isn't
judgmental isn't trying to fix isn't
partial it isn't a way of like hey let's
witness and be in this together so that
nobody feels alone and so that everybody
can see themselves more clearly yeah
okay so given given how we've just sort
of described Community how often how
often do you see this form of community
in our society now oh wow relative to
something else I mean I'm lucky I get to
see it a ton Tara and I were just
talking the other day and the fact that
um we were laughing we were like yeah
people maybe they come because of of ter
I you know maybe because of the podcast
that's why they come into this work but
they stay because of the community you
know that like it's people wanting to be
a part of this depth and support you
know and and so we do a weeklong we do a
weeklong event and then we find out that
that group of people have been like in
communication for five or six or seven
years I mean this was a five-year-old
Community uh and like so many people
showed up for it
so in the morning thing so I get to see
it a lot but in society I see it it's
incredibly rare you know there's some
men's groups that have it or women's
groups that have it there are you know
some very tight 12-step programs that
have it there's um some churches that
have it um there are some Churches who
have dysfunctional communities as well
so there are some places some SAS you
know some Buddha SAS that have it but
that it's a pretty rare thing for it to
be deeply vulnerable and that sense of
oh this is this is us this isn't me or
you this is
us so it's it's an incredibly rare thing
and if you look at the statistics it's
just like the number of friends that the
average American has is like shrinking
all the time and I think I heard it was
like under three recently like three
friends um people that they thought they
were close to um so and so many people
have had like that funeral like had like
a dysfunctional form of it that they're
just like yeah it's easier to be in my
phone or in my screen or it's easier to
not not feel it but like it's like not
working out you know you you it it takes
a toll it like it it starts making you
weaker and less resilient and it it it
like it becomes a heavy weight on your
system to not have it and and and it's a
pandemic as far as I'm concerned like
there's just this tremendous lack of
community and I don't even think people
know it's possible it's one of the
things that I saw when I was looking
around the room of whatever it was 20 25
people there yesterday yesterday I was
like there were some people who didn't
know our work or were weren't a part of
it and I could see how touched they were
that this was possible that it was
possible that we could come together and
support each other in this way in which
nobody felt obligation and nobody felt
like they had to take care of each
other yeah yeah and something you
mentioned there was how how so many
people report in like surveys as having
like just two or three friends and in a
lot of cases a lot of times I've seen a
lot of times people have like two or
three friends often those friendships
are sort of like let's hang out and
watch Netflix together but we're not
really going to go deep into our stuff
and and so like it's it's in the
Zeitgeist right now that the the
loneliness epidemic has been in the news
and people are talking about it and so
what is it what is it in your opinion
that makes it that makes community in
the way that we've been talking about it
rare in society right
now yeah I think a lot of it is just
what you know what's known what's not
known meaning like I didn't know that
this was possible growing up right so my
experience of growing up was you had one
or family had one or two family friends
and there was things you talked about
and there was things you didn't talk
about anything real you didn't talk
about anything fun you did talk about um
there was no example whatsoever that it
was even possible to be witnessed and
loved in a non-judgmental way and when
oftentimes when our Community has
problems it's people coming in telling
them how they should be because what's
happening is they don't want to feel
something like I don't want to feel the
pain of the death of your child so I'm
gonna say oh feel better to you or I
don't want to
feel the fact that my marriage could
fall apart or that financially I could
be in trouble and so I'm just going to
come in and tell you how to handle stuff
and
so the help that people experience from
Community isn't actually very freaking
helpful so why the hell want it right
like if
all my only sense of community is that
it's very unhelpful why would I why
would I think that it's a useful thing
if my only sense of community is that I
have to look a certain way and I have to
be a certain way and I have to feel a
certain way to be accepted why the [__]
do I want Community I don't want that
[__] you know what I want is a place
where I can be loved for who I am where
I'm at in this moment and if I had that
sense of community and and as and as far
as I have seen anybody who tastes that
anybody I've ever seen who tast taste
that they're just like I want [__]
that I want that like it's like water on
a dry sponge but I don't think there's a
lot of examples of it and I think
there's a lot of counter examples
exactly yeah exactly the wor I was gonna
say yeah yeah I think I think a lot of
people have had experiences of community
growing up that were that felt stifling
to them maybe they were a form of
community that had worked for the
previous generation but for them just
wasn't working and so they might have
just decided okay I'm just going to be
better off going on my own path and then
not finding new
community right if if if for instance
every person in America had witnessed
when their parents had problems
that 10 or 12 other couples came around
sat in a circle witnessed the mom
letting out everything the dad letting
out everything witnessed the anger being
released in a healthy way
witnessed the the
community um doing a forgiveness ritual
for one
another and and the community asking
forgiveness for not supporting them
better if if if they had
witnessed people speaking their truth
that is really hard to speak and being
loved for it everybody would want
Community everybody would want it and
they would
sacrifice money to have it and they
would sacrifice
power to have it because it is
unbelievably nourishing and you know as
soon as you see it you know it and I I
cannot tell you how many people when
they see it they're just like yeah
that's the thing that I want in my life
but instead they didn't get that you
know they got don't talk about it give
people advice you know act right for the
Neighbors look
good great yeah like yeah not healthy so
so one thing I noticed is that when
people have when people have like felt
exiled by a community in in this way or
felt the a long-term lack of community
that's just become kind of baked into
the way that they see the world yeah
that when they find real Community
there's a way that they're scared of it
and also deeply attracted to it at the
same time often which can often lead to
sort of attacking it a little bit to
test it and then also like clinging to
it um yeah so I want to kind of talk
about both of those angles a little bit
uh what what let's start with what
scares people about the the kind of
community that we're talking about
here the kind where they're
seen yeah we heard it multiple times
last yesterday right like yesterday last
afternoon we so multiple people were
like I letting this amount of love in is
hard for me you know it's scary because
it it will rip out your identity like
the comparative mind I'm this and you're
that and I'm not good enough or you're
better than I am or I'm better than you
like that [__] doesn't exist very long
in the community like that so that's
scary um it's also scary to be
vulnerable generally like oh I'm going
to be seen I'm going to get rejected I'm
G to get I'm G to get pushed out I'm G
to get ostracize so you have all the
fear that came up your whole life with
being real in front of people now shows
up in this community yeah so I think are
the main things that really scare people
about the community is that oh I'm going
to be deeply loved or I'm going to be
deeply rejected um both of those are
very scary because both of those are you
know [__] with our identities in a big
way yeah I think another thing that
happens is that when you when you drop
the defenses that have kept you safe in
the past there's a lot to
feel yeah and those defenses were there
because feeling those things wasn't safe
so yeah there there's sort of when when
you're in a group
and your defenses aren't necessary or
they're seen through or they're loved in
a way that was not previously
experienced then it's scary because
you're now in territory that was once
dangerous yeah yeah yeah yeah it's I
mean so I think all of that I think the
other thing that makes it um I think the
other part of feeling everything that
makes it scary is that you have to feel
everything like all that [__] has to be
felt and like one of the Hallmarks of a
great Community is that everybody's like
they welcome each other's feelings
they're not trying to fix each other's
feelings that's what makes it really
healthy is was like that deep welcoming
of the of the emotional experience yeah
and so what are some it's G to come up
it's going to come up because I mean if
you weren't mourning yesterday and you
were with 20 people who were mourning
it's a difficult place to sit you know
it's it's not it's not it's not easy to
sit with a whole bunch of people having
emotions if you're not willing to have
the emotions you'll get very agitated
very you know judgmental and [__] like
that yeah
right
so we just started talking about the
signs of a healthy but we didn't yet
talk about what makes people love it yes
so just go back to what makes people
love it
yeah okay so so what makes people
love this this form of
Community uh you know we are all we all
want on some level we all want to be
seen and loved for who we are and be met
with non-judgment to be bet met with
acceptance like if you're listening to
this right now and you close your eyes
and you just ask yourself like what
would it be like to be met with
acceptance and loved for who I was and
not have to put up a front like do you
want that and I I can't imagine somebody
being like nope that sounds like [__]
you know um there's this great
experiment that I used to talk about
which was I called it the island
experiment and it's
imagine you were dropped onto an island
and there was 12 people who
unconditionally Loved You Then they yeah
they drew boundaries with you they they
wasn't like they were just accepting
your [__] but they loved you
unconditionally they accepted where you
were and they loved you unconditionally
and now if you imagine that you were
stuck on that island for a
decade right and you're with these basic
kind like Saint Saints almost like
people who are just like in that kind of
deep love like who are you at the end of
that
decade like where where you know where's
your fear where's your love where's your
like how do you interact in the world
how do you see
yourself that's why everybody wants it
because they know if they're met there
what becomes of them they become the
thing that they they truly are and and
so I think that's the thing that really
pulls people and they and people can
sniff it out it's just so rare that it's
yeah speaking of sniff there's not a lot
of places yeah there's not a lot of
places to sniff for it yeah yeah and and
speaking of sniffing for it what what
are the signs of a healthy
Community yeah I mean there are a lot of
different communities out there and some
of them can be dangerous and there's a
reason why people have been Have Become
rather yeah hesitant about community and
our society vulnerability top to bottom
is a huge one emotional
fluidity top to bottom of the community
or side to side of the community are
really important
transparency really important part of a
healthy Community a feeling of
um that there
isn't us and them in the community it's
it's just there's an usess to it um as
far as like if there's a problem in the
community it's all of our problems it's
not it's not your problem um is another
really healthy aspect of a community um
not a s not a lot not a feeling of
obligation that people aren't acting in
the community out of obligation they're
if they feel obligation they announce it
and every body realizes that nobody
wants someone to act out of obligation
that's another great sign of a healthy
Community
um
non-judgmental it's not a judgmental
there's it's not performative people
don't feel like they have to perform to
be a part of the
community um healthy boundaries you know
very healthy clear boundaries about like
how what this community is and isn't
when you know if if you want something
no not like trying to hold people into
the community and having a very
thoughtful uh way of a of a community
person
leaving so th those are some of the
things that make like a community like a
strong
container yeah makes it something that's
really healthy and it can be less or
more conscious I've seen very healthy
communities that are not like all that
conscious it's not like Hey we're in a
community it's just
like there's just been like a couple
people in the community that are really
great examples and you know and it can
I've seen it in a small town once it was
amazing to see that and where it was
just like it just had become the culture
it just had you know and I've seen some
companies I've seen two companies have
like a really great sense of community
as well and I think it was really
conscious to create that community on
some levels of the organization but it
was very unconscious and also in a lot
of like so it doesn't have to even be
like hey we're in a community and we're
doing this it's something that can
actually happen a little oddly a little
bit unconsciously or not conscious to
everybody in
it yeah yeah I'm curious about some
example sort of like boundaries as you
describe about like what a community
what this community is or isn't or what
like I guess there's a spectrum here
from from not not being consciously
created to being very principled and
very well defined yeah I'm
kind a coule DAT points from that
Spectrum yeah like yesterday I was
really clear inside of that container
it's like there's we're not here judging
each other and we're not here to make
each other try to feel better we're
accepting people for each other for how
we feel and whatever is true for you and
your feelings is what what we want to
hear about and be shared and share
that's that's like a boundary that the
community if it was not that it would
not have been a very healing situation
for anybody let alone everybody so those
are all examples of it
um things just like lying probably would
be another great boundary like yeah
we're not lying we don't gossip you know
we work out our [__] if there's problems
between us we work it out and we work it
out with witnessing those would be all
potential boundaries that you would have
yeah and I imagine another boundary
might be that we don't always work it
out right now because sometimes we have
other agendas of course yeah of course I
need space but I will come back to it
that's yeah yeah and I for me I don't
like another boundary would be just like
you no man can tell another man what to
do or no woman can tell another man or
woman what to do like there there's
a there's a understanding that everybody
is responsible for
themselves um which is an odd Paradox
but that we're all responsible for the
community but that only really works
works when everybody is taking
responsibility for themselves it doesn't
work when somebody is like feels like a
victim to the community not taking full
responsibility for their actions it
doesn't it doesn't work both things have
to be
there all right
so so I want to give people something
practical that they
can so they might go fine Community but
also a beautiful thing to do is just to
cultivate Community Where You Are
and like plant a flag and I'm curious
what what people can do to to cultivate
that in their lives whether it is to go
find it somewhere or to plant the flag
and start cultivating it on the
spot yeah so I mean I remember like
moving and going okay I need a sense of
community and going and finding it and
um the way that I did it was I just
looked for any like I went to any place
where I thought there was a sense of
community and I looked for healthy ones
that were communicative and deep and
there was a lot of acceptance I went to
12-step programs for children of
Alcoholics I went to yoga classes I went
to book clubs I went to like and I just
like until I found the place where where
that that strong sense of community was
in
existence um so you know our courses is
another example other people's courses
there's lots of places where there's
just a that sense of community and so
it's just a trial and error get a get a
feeling go where you're interested but
also like don't stay long if you don't
feel this really tight sense of
community um so that's one as far as
cultivating it
yourself what I notice is that if you're
in view if you're doing vulnerability
impartiality empathy and wonder as a way
of life not as a
communication
practice um but is like oh this is I
noticed that that when I treat myself
and others like this it's my life is
better then that will cultivate a sense
of community there are some skills that
you need for like the whole Community
part of it right like like how to do a
morning ceremony is something that you
know you might want to look into like
maybe the Quakers or East Africa has
some really great ceremonies um so you
might want to look into other people's
ceremonies and see what you can
replicate or or the stuff that we do um
but the core of it is that vulnerability
impartiality empathy and wonder with
each other and and cultivating that and
learning those skills together is is a
great way to to create that sense of
community and what happens is that when
you act that way because other people
want a sense of community like it oddly
it's just more and more people come to
you I mean I've seen you experience that
in your life the more you're there the
more people come to you but not only do
they come to you but they want to be
there in that depth with you and so even
if it takes some time it just it happens
and it happens to everybody I've ever
seen like deeply cultivate this is like
when you know how to connect people want
to
connect yeah and in in my world I've
noticed how like over the course of the
past number of years Alexa and I have
been really seeking to create community
and earlier on it was like
very Hands-On like okay let's find the
people that we want to have Community
with we're going to pull together and
buy a piece of property you know and
sometimes people do that and it works it
didn't work out for us in that
particular instance and what ended up
happening though is that we've ended up
having Community around us because we
did something like planting a flag we
did something like just okay here's
here's what we want and like we we kind
of created a world where people could
come around us and be around us and yeah
we're not like running or leading a
community but what happened was that we
started a bit of a center of gravity
that has cessed into into a beautiful
sense of community that still of course
has its figurings out and its challenges
and its conflicts and what is this what
is is this a community who's in it what
is it all this but there's a lot of
questions that just there's a one thing
that I can say to Define this community
is that there's a number of people who
are
sitting in the
questions a lot of the time and as a
result there's just a lot of support
available and there's a lot of
gatherings and there's a lot
of there's a lot of spaciousness to move
things individually or as groups and
with support and yeah it wasn't top down
created yeah yeah I saw it in your at
your wedding right like that was a
really strong sense of community it was
incredibly trans arent in incredibly
forthright incredibly like it wasn't
like oh let me tell you a cute story
about Brett and Alexa it was like here's
some real [__] and and like you could
just see that sense of of depth even in
the ceremony it was yeah very clearly
there whether there's a structure to it
or whether you call it a community or
not there was a lot of people being
transparent and supporting one
another yeah yeah and it felt a lot of
it felt very self-organized the the
community aspect of it just the way
people showed up makes makes the
community yeah it's I mean it's our
nature to be in community we're like
we're not a
non-communal you know
individual uh so solo uh
species yeah
yeah beautiful cool awesome yeah good to
be with you good to be with with you
yesterday yeah and I I just like I want
to for those in the community that came
yesterday I just want to thank you very
much I was deeply touched and and and
healed by the by the ceremony yesterday
so I just want to thank everybody who
showed
up yeah all right thank you everybody
for listening if you have any follow-up
questions from this episode I'd love to
hear them maybe we'll do a community
number two
someday and uh you can reach out to us
on it's X
now Plus Twitter um or in a circle
Community or email or on our website
artof accomplishment.
comom